                The "HEAD Pong" Vendor-specific Message
                              Version 1


INTRODUCTION

Please read the Vendor-Messages specifications if you have not done so
already.


SPECIFICATIONS

    Name: "HEAD Pong"
    Vendor: LIME
    ID: 24
    Version: 1
    TTL: 1
    Payload: 1 byte flags + 1 byte result code + additional data


DESCRIPTION

The flags (offset 0x00; 1 byte):

    Bit 0 (0x01): Carries available ranges
    Bit 1 (0x02): Carries alternate locations
    Bit 2 (0x04): Carries alternate push locations

The result code (offset 0x01; byte):

    The lower 3 bits report the general status:

    0x00: File not found
    0x01: Complete file
    0x02: Partial file

    The next 2 bits indicate further information:

    Bit 2: (0x04):   Firewalled
    Bit 3: (0x08):   Currently downloading

If the receiver of a HEAD Ping does not share a file with requested
URN (partial or complete), it returns a HEAD Pong which carries only
flags and a zero result code. Otherwise, the HEAD Pong carries further
data:

Vendor code (offset 0x02-0x05; 4 bytes):

This is simply the 4-byte vendor code of the sender for
informational purposes.

Queue status (offset 0x06; 1 byte):

This is signed 8-bit integer. The value 0x7f is special and indicates
a "busy" queue. Otherwise positive values indicate the number of
available upload slots. If the value is negative an immediate upload
request is unlikely to succeed and absolute value indicates how many
requests are queued currently.

Additional data (offset 0x07; variable size):

Note that additional data has a fixed order. Receivers must carefully
check for truncated data.  The sender should only include requested data
and must clear the relevant bit for data not included. Nonetheless
receivers must be able to deal with unrequested items and at least be
able to skip over it. The sender must also be careful to keep the size
of the response sufficiently small especially when it is send over UDP.

First, available ranges:

If flag bit 0 is set, the HEAD Pong carries a list of available ranges.
The next two bytes define the size in bytes of this sub-payload (16-bit
big-endian integer).  This is a multiple of 8 bytes whereas the lower 4
bytes are the 32-bit start offset and the next two are the 32-bit end
offset. It is therefore not possible to indicate ranges beyond the
first 4 GiB in case of large files.

Second, alternate push locations:

If flag bit 2 is set, the HEAD Pong carries a list of alternate push
locations. The next two bytes define the size in bytes of this
sub-payload (16-bit big-endian integer). Alternate push locations are
encoded as a one byte of flags; followed by a 16 byte GUID, a 6-byte
IPv4 peer address[1] and finally up to 7 push proxy adresses encoded as
6-byte peer addresses. This includes RUDP-capable push locations.

Third, alternate locations:

If flag bit 1 is set, the HEAD Pong carries a list of alternate
locations. The next two bytes define the size in bytes of this
sub-payload (16-bit big-endian integer). Alternate locations are encoded
as a 6-byte IPv4 peer address. This sub-payload size must therefore be a
multiple of 6 bytes.


[1] A 6-byte IPv4 address consists of a 4-byte IPv4 address followed by
2 bytes encoding the 16-bit port number as little-endian integer. This
is the usual format as used elsewhere by the Gnutella protocol.

/* vi: set tw=72 ts=4 et: */
